dopamine itself is not the reward it's
the build-up to the reward and the
reward has more of a kind of opioid
bliss-like property which itself is not
bad if it's endogenous released from
within but when we can just sit there
like the like the rat with no dopamine
gorging ourselves with pleasures so to
speak what you end up with is somebody
that feels really unmotivated
and those pleasures no longer work to
tickle those feel-good circuits and so
there's no reason for them to go out and
pursue anything to how do we spike
intentionally you've talked about we can
spike testosterone but i want to know
can we spike dopamine
yeah so um and you've done this so your
example of
craving is
actually what you crave
you crave the feeling of craving is
beautiful because it would what it means
is that you don't allow yourself to go
so far down the arc of the dopamine
trajectory to get to the other source of
motivation so there are two sources of
motivation as it relates to dopamine and
then we can think about tools that we
could export from these that are nested
in neurobiology the first is to do what
you do
which is to be able to sense the craving
as its own form of pleasure this has
kind of remnants of carol dreck's growth
mindset that you eventually develop a
pleasure in the seeking and the striving
has you know uh has flavors of a david
goggins type approach where where it
seems like he gets pleasure from the
friction itself and so there are
elements of that you seem to have that
as well
but
if you can start to identify the craving
as its own internally released drug this
thing dopamine that is a source of
motivation then what you realize is that
capturing the reward
is wonderful
but attaching dopamine to the reward is
actually a little bit dangerous
attaching yeah this is celebrating the
win celebrating the win more than the
pursuit it actually sets you up for
failure in the future and so this gets
us right into something called dopamine
reward prediction error and reward
prediction error is basically if you
expect something to be really great
and then it's not quite that great your
dopamine baseline lowers and now
understanding what we know about
dopamine that means that not only did
you you feel as if you lost because it
wasn't as much a celebration as you
thought it would be but it also means
that you're starting from a lower place
meaning you are less motivated now the
simpler way to conceptualize this is
i have a colleague at stanford she runs
the addiction dual diagnosis clinic at
uh her name is dr anna lemke she has a
book called dopamine nation that's out
right now
and she's really described this pleasure
pain balance where anytime you have a
bunch of dopamine and you're in pursuit
pursuit pursuit
after you achieve a win now this could
be a business win a relationship a win
of any kind
but
inevitably there's going to be a tipping
back of the scale on the pain side
and that pain side is always going to go
a little bit higher than the dopamine
side so this is what you would feel if
you pursued a goal like building a big
company
here it comes here comes the big sale
and then there's the well what now you
have the kind of letdown now if you wait
if you simply wait and stop pursuing
dopamine for a short while the scale
starts to reset the problem is a lot of
people immediately roll right into the
next pursuit
and then what happens is that scale
starts to get stuck on the pain side a
little bit more a little bit more a
little bit more and pretty soon no
amount of seeking will allow you to
experience that craving and motivation
so what what does this mean in terms of
an actual tool well first of all
if people can do what you do they're
going to be in a much better position in
life doesn't matter if it's school sport
relationship any domain of life if you
can start to register ah that craving
and that friction and that desire that
almost kind of low level of agitation
sometimes high level of agitation that
is that i'm trying to impose my will on
the world in a benevolent way we hope
that's dopamine it's working with its
close cousin which is epinephrine which
is adrenaline they are very close cause
in fact dopamine manufactures
epinephrine a lot of people don't know
this but adrenaline is actually made
from the molecule dopamine
okay so those two are hanging out
together it's like crave work crave work
craven work craven work craving work and
then you get the win
and some people
allow the big peak in dopamine to be
associated with the win
and
smart people
learn to adjust their celebration
internally right this is all internal
you could throw the biggest party in the
world but as long as you're kind of in
laid back and
looking at this not letting yourself get
manic crazy
you won't necessarily crash as hard
and pretty soon your system will reset
so you take the day you clean up the
dishes you relax you go what now i'm
feeling a little low well rather than
going out and spiking your dopamine
again just wait understand that the
scale will reset again give yourself a
few days where you're going to feel a
little kind of underwhelmed things
aren't going to be as interesting
it's going to be hard to trigger that
big release because you just had
the peak
well if you adjust that you relax you
understand there's always a little bit
of a postpartum depression we sometimes
hear about postpartum depression that's
a clinical thing but there's always that
kind of today's not as exciting
as the previous days what am i going to
do with my life but then
if you let it start ratcheting up again
then what you realize is your capacity
to tap into dopamine as a motivator not
just seeking dopamine rewards that is
infinite and i i can say with with great
certainty that this is
how you were able to build a big company
and sell it how you've been able to
build a successful podcast and sell it
how you constantly seeking because
seeking is the reward and i think for
most people we think of the reward as
the finish line and so the key is to get
to the finish line step into the end
zone but no end zone dance it's just
like yep and now i'm gonna go do it
again
that's really the key that's that's the
key to doing it over and over and when i
see big athletes or
academics or anyone or musicians and
they
rise and crash
it's clear they've lost the touch with
the motivation evoked dopamine and
they've lost touch probably because it
hasn't really been described by the
neuroscience community until anna has
started talking about this stuff
publicly and i'm just kind of echoing
what she's beautifully said
said much better than i am
which is that you should always expect
that after a bunch of pleasure there's
going to be that low and then that
craving how do i get back to there again
and the key is you have to walk the
staircase again you don't get to do this
as a square wave pull you know you don't
get to just ascend ascend ascend it's
always up
down
up a little bit higher down up you know
it's that's the function so um i don't
know if that resonates with your
experience i'm over here freaking out so
you've literally just explained what i
will say is the single most important
loop if you want to be successful
and you used words
attach right you had another one which
was about your t i forget the exact word
but you're taking you're inserting
yourself consciously into the process
because what i learned very early on and
i'm so grateful in the same way that you
are grateful that your upbringing wasn't
perfect but it ended up giving you
a frame of reference and insights that
have propelled you forward i'm very
grateful that i spent a decade just
trying to get rich that was the state
admission i would say it every day like
i'm here to get rich i show up to work
to get rich it's about getting rich rich
rich rich and it didn't work
and so then my wife pulls me aside and
she's like you're now damaging the
marriage like you're just so fiendishly
focused on the goal
that there's nothing as integrated in
your life you're doing something you
hate for an end state that may never
come
and that was so profound and it shook me
so deeply and it suddenly became clear
that from a neurological perspective
what i wanted was to feel alive and once
i put everything in the pursuit i'm just
interested in can i show up every day
and sincerely pursue this thing which i
may never get but i'm gonna honor myself
celebrate myself big up myself as the
brits would say for just showing up
today and actually trying to make it
happen
and one that's way more sustainable and
then two you don't
you don't get tricked into thinking that
oh when i get this thing that i'll feel
good because it's the craving that makes
me feel alive so it's the state of
wanting that is in and of itself the
pleasurable act that's right and so
i began to use the metaphor of i'm gonna
climb this mountain only to want the
next mountain to climb and
once i knew that well then you have to
be totally comfortable dropping back
down and starting all over now the
interesting thing and i don't know if
i'm fooling myself or if i have so
integrated that trick
but the come down isn't hard for me so
i i think my last day at quest was a
monday and tuesday i started impact
theory and so that went from i had 3 000
employees your position matters you get
a lot of deference uh you've got a
privileged parking space you know what i
mean like there's there's a lot of
things that go into it and
but i didn't none of like my reward
system was tied to that so it was very
easy for me to start the next day with
there was only seven of us and no one
had time for any deference of any kind
and i went from having an ea which you
can't imagine how amazing that is to not
and you're doing everything for yourself
again
but that wasn't a painful thing because
i was so focused on all right cool this
is step one again and now can can we
repeat well it helps if you can expect
that there will be a little bit of a dip
post win or post
whatever um that's helpful there's
always a refractory period of any kind
so to speak if you expect it that's
great because you eliminate the the
downside of the reward prediction error
reward prediction error can also be
conceptualized as i tell you we're going
to go this restaurant i keep building up
the food building up the food i actually
raised the expectation and the
requirement that that food be really
spectacular better off i just tell you
it's going to be pretty good and then
you're wowed by it right because if your
dopamine was higher in anticipation than
the actual food evoked well then it
makes sense why would you're always
integrating over the dopamine release
you had previously
now there are a couple things that you
said in there that i want to highlight
which i find so interesting uh and we
can get a little bit um eastern
philosophy mystical here but tie it back
to some real neuroscience which is you
said you know that's the juice the
motivation is the juice you know that
if you look at eastern philosophy and
they talk about qi you know in this you
know what is that i i wager that is
dopamine the desire to pursue things and
to create more of oneself and
as a species whether or not you decide
to have kids or not those circuits all
use the one universal currency dopamine
of wanting more things that are outside
the confines of your skin and that's
what's driven forward evolution of
individuals and
families and cultures and our our
species as a whole and again the
circuitry has been there for many many
tens if not hundreds of thousands of
years and so it's and it's highly
conserved and so what that means is that
it doesn't matter if it's bitcoin or
ethereum it doesn't matter if it's
putting rockets on other planets it
doesn't matter if it's building the
first automobile it's the same currency
so understanding those cycles is really
key the other thing is the element of
pain i think that understanding that
pain and pleasure in this really dynamic
balance
can also help us which in the following
way
any pain that you feel the longer day
the less sleep the the kind of agony
that things aren't working that power
outlet doesn't work or the internet is
slow whatever it is
the amount of pleasure that you will
eventually experience
is directly relation related excuse me
to how much pain you experience so we
know this from actually what nowadays
would be considered quite barbaric and
unethical experiments where they would
give people electrical shocks
and they would measure their response
and then they'd say we're going to
increase it we're going to increase it
eventually they get to the point where a
slight shock that was previously very
painful actually evokes a sense of
pleasure
now you couldn't do these experiments
anymore these are not the experiments i
do in my lab
and these are older experiments but for
instance and this has been discussed in
scientific research papers giving
somebody a like a 10-minute ice bath for
instance or even a three-minute ice bath
or a one-minute ice bath it's quite
painful but there was a study from the
university of prague the european
journal of physiology showed that after
a painful ice bath stimulus
the amount of dopamine release goes up
for two and a half hours to 250 percent
above baseline and that's not because
the ice bath itself evokes dopamine
release a lot of people think oh cold
water evokes dopamine release no pain
evokes dopamine release after the pain
is over yesterday i tweaked my back
because i do this stupid thing every few
years the same stupid thing and it's
really painful and then you just
remember all the ways in which you can't
move around i was like standing up this
morning like ah and just walking is so
painful as the pain has started to
dissipate you get a little bit of a high
right you get a little bit of a euphoria
that's dopamine because of the the
degree of pain you experienced
previously predicts how much pleasure so
when you start a company down in the
dregs and you're shoveling again
that's beautiful because that means that
the wind that you achieve
is going to be as good or greater than
the one you had previously in your case
with quest and so we go back to this
example the person that's not motivated
that can't get off the couch that
doesn't want to do anything well this is
the problem we remember the rad
experiment they are effectively the rat
with no dopamine but they can still
achieve
some sense of pleasure by consuming
excess calories by consuming social
media and look i'm not judging i do this
stuff too right scrolling social media
if you've ever scrolled social media and
you're like i don't even know why i'm
doing this it doesn't really feel that
good
and i can remember a time where you'd
see something it was just so cool or you
see something online i remember this
when ted talks first came out i was like
this is amazing these are some at least
some of them are really smart people
sharing really cool insights and then
now that they're like a gazillion
ted talks i remember spending a winter
in my office at when i was a junior
professor cleaning my office finally
and binging ted talks in the background
thinking this is a good use of my time
pretty soon they all sucked to me i was
like this isn't good so what you need to
do is stop watching dead docs for a
while
wait and then they become interesting
again and that's this pain pleasure
balance and so for people that aren't
feeling motivated the problem is they're
not motivated but they're getting just
enough or excess sustenance so they're
getting the little mild hits of opioid
it becomes an opioid system and if you
think about the opioid drugs as opposed
to dopamine dopaminergic drugs
dopaminergic drugs make people rabid for
everything you know drugs of abuse like
cocaine and amphetamine make people
incredibly outward directed or they
hardly notice anything except what they
want more of more more more it's very
it's bad
because those drugs trigger so much
dopamine release that they become the
reward it's very circular the only the
drug can give that much dopamine nothing
they could pursue would give them as
much dopamine as the drug itself
so there's that and then there's the
kind of opioid like effects
of constantly indulging oneself with
social media or with video games or with
with food or with anything to the point
where it no longer evokes the motivation
and craving and this is really the new
evolution of the understanding of
dopamine in neuroscience which is that
dopamine itself is not the reward it's
the build up to the reward and the
reward has more of a kind of opioid
bliss-like property which itself is not
bad if it's endogenous released from
within but when we can just sit there
like they're like the rat with no
dopamine gorging ourselves with
pleasures so to speak what you end up
with is somebody that feels really
unmotivated and those pleasures no
longer work to tickle those feel-good
circuits and so there's no reason for
them to go out and pursue anything and
that's a pretty dark picture so the the
keys are
to pursue rewards but understand that
the pursuit is actually the reward if
you want to have repeated
wins okay you the celebration has to be
less than the pursuit and that's hard
for some people to do
they you know they it's got to be that
your celebration is slightly less
dopaminergic
it can be very reflective you can be in
gratitude those are other
neurotransmitter systems but you don't
want to be on that high as you celebrate
the wind
you want to be
trickling out your dopamine
regularly until you pursue things and
then just understand there will always
be a crash of pain and the more pain you
experience the more dopamine you can
achieve if you get back on the avenue of
period yeah this gets into unintended
consequences of modernity and so we're
living through this time where we you
know going back to that flag that we
planted of these unintended consequences
of oh i can make myself smell good oh i
can you know watch the coolest video oh
like tick tock dude i don't have an
addictive personality that's the first
thing where i'll lose an hour and be
like what the [__] did i just do well
that's
the problem is not pleasures
the problem is that pleasure experienced
without prior requirement for pursuit
yes
is
terrible for us it's terrible for us as
individuals it's terrible for us as as
groups and i have great confidence in
the human species to work this out but
we are finding now and we are going to
increasingly find that those who will be
successful young or old
are going to be those people who can
create their own
internal buffers they're going to be
able to control their relationship to
pleasures because the proximity to
pleasures and the availability is the
problem if you look at
the increase in
use of drugs of abuse or prescription
medication which at least at the first
past deliver pleasure pain relief the
whole issue with the opioid crisis and
dopaminergic drugs like ritalin adderall
you know there is sometimes as a
clinical need but tons of people are
taking those recreationally now or to
study huge dopamine increases are what
those cause
that is a problem that's a serious
problem because it creates a cycle where
you you need more of that specific thing
i would say addiction
is a progressive narrowing of the things
that bring you pleasure that's such a
good difference and you know and i don't
like to comment too much on
enlightenment because you know i don't
really know what that is as a
neurobiologist but a good life we could
say is a progressive expansion of the
things that bring you pleasure and even
better is a good life is a progressive
expansion of the things that bring you
pleasure and includes pleasure through
motivation and hard work and
understanding this pain pleasure balance
whereby if you experience pain and you
can continue to be in that friction and
exert effort
the rewards are that much greater when
they arrive
and so
i think that if you look at any drug of
abuse or any situation where somebody
isn't motivated or thinks that now they
may have clinically diagnosed attention
deficit hyperactivity disorder but a lot
of what people think is adhd it turns
out is people just over consuming
dopamine from various sources and then
and also the context within a tick tock
feed is the context switch is insane the
brain has never seen first of all
there's a first time in human evolution
that we wrote with our thumbs but that's
a pretty benign shift and that the other
shift is
normally you walk from one room to
another or from a field into the trees
or from a hut into or a house or
whatever it is but now you can get 10
000 context switches in that 30 minutes
of scrolling on instagram or to talk and
so it's all about self-regulation we are
going to select for the people that can
self-regulate and
so then people say well how do you
self-regulate how do kids self-regulate
well this is my hope and one of the
reasons i've gotten excited about public
education and teaching neuroscience is
that
this is a place where knowledge of
knowledge actually can allow oneself to
intervene when you think i'm feeling low
i don't feel good nothing really feels
good am i depressed maybe but maybe
you're just you've saturated the
dopamine circuits you're now in the pain
part of things what do you do well you
have to stop you need you need to
replenish dopamine you need to stop
engaging with this behavior and then
your pleasure for it will come back but
you have to constantly control the hinge
it's not just about being back and forth
on the seesaw you have to make sure the
hinge doesn't get stuck in pain or in
pleasure so it's a dynamic process being
a human being it's not easy and remember
these circuits didn't evolve for this
purpose
they evolved primarily for
making more of ourselves that's why
they're so closely tied to the
reproductive circuits and that's why it
was interesting and very relevant that
you said that your
desire to have sex with your wife is one
of the most powerful feelings and it
kind of as a from a neurochemical
perspective it wicks out into all these
other pursuits right those other
pursuits aren't about sex per se but
it's the same molecule so the feeling is
the same it's just that some people for
some people the amplitude of that
dopamine signal for craving sex is very
high for some people that's lower and
it's higher for um video games you know
whatever you lean into and and you
think about often
in these pursuits will start to reshape
these circuits because these
dopaminergic circuits are tied to
everything you know there are examples
of people getting addicted to the most
incredible things they're also examples
of people getting very good but not
addicted to chess for instance it's all
the same
general set of mechanisms
yeah you talked earlier about
the the knowledge of knowledge and that
was the big breakthrough for me at the
darkest period of my life i happened to
grab a book we talked about this briefly
in our first interview i happened to
grab a book that talked about
neuroplasticity and they were
hypothesizing maybe this is a thing
and that
gave me hope because i could imagine
what was going on in my brain and once i
can visualize it then i feel like i can
insert myself into it it's why i've
gotten so interested in health why i'm
so interested in neuroscience
is for me if i were sliding towards
depression i would do exactly what
you're saying i would assess that and be
like okay wait a second i know that i
can insert conscious control i know that
this is a
biological experience and i'm i'm
obsessed with that idea that you're
having a biological experience and
to me like there's some people that see
the way the magic trick is done and it
loses the magic then for other people
it's like you see that it's this is
somebody that's spent 30 000 hours
learning how to move their hands so that
you don't notice that they just moved
the coin you know from this hand to this
hand it's
it blows me away i love magic uh before
the pandemic a friend took me up to the
magic castle here in hollywood and
there's some incredible stuff going on
magic is actually really cool we could
uh just as a from a neuroscience
perspective magic it's all about
um creating gaps in your perception
that's obvious right
and when that happens because the the
brain is so accustomed to the laws of
physics like objects fall down not up
etc when that happens it clearly
triggers the surprise circuitry and that
itself that feeling of delight and
surprise is absolutely tied also to
these doping dopamine circuits it's
interesting though that doesn't send us
into like terror like the people
depends on the magic trick when i went
there there was this crazy trick that
the guy did he took out cards and i was
invited up to sit next to him i signed
my name on a card
i took the card i took the card
i tore it up i put it in my pocket
and at the end of the show we went
through a series of things at the end of
the show he
took off his shoe and presented the card
to me with the signature intact and the
card intact and that was my signature
so he clearly created gaps of perception
um but at some point as adults so i
think as long as we know the context is
right then we can we can do this all
right my friend i have a big
announcement my incredible and talented
wife lisa is about to launch her new
book radical confidence in it she has
managed to perfectly capture the process
of how to go from feeling lost and
insecure to taking control of your life
and doing amazing things despite feeling
fear sometimes a lot of fear now let me
tell you nobody knows lisa better than
me but when i read radical confidence
for the first time and heard her
describe what it was like for her to go
from having these big exciting dreams as
a kid to then as an adult scheduling her
life around the tv shows that she wanted
to watch or how lonely and isolated she
felt instead of pursuing her dreams it
was brutal for me i would never say
though that it was worth it for her to
go through all of that just so that she
could write something down that allows
others to avoid it but i will say that
at least she was able to capture the
strategies that she used to break out of
that rut find her voice and begin doing
incredible things despite her
insecurities and fears that she wasn't
going to be good enough to achieve great
things so while it hurts me to know the
dark place that lisa went through i
really am excited for people who are
going through something similar right
now to read this book radical confidence
is an instruction manual for how to
become the hero of your own life even
when you're scared to death look i know
better than just about anybody how easy
it is to get off track in life or to
just not have yet found your calling and
it's even easier for people to feel so
insecure and unprepared that they don't
even want to pursue the things that they
want but what lisa shows people in
radical confidence is that the radical
part is that you can accomplish
extraordinary things even when you feel
fear that's what radical confidence is
being afraid and unsure and having a
tool kit that allows you to still make
massive progress pre-order your copy
today because if you act now you can
claim the bonuses that lisa has created
for you at
radicalconfidence.com they're only
available if you pre-order so act now
then once you've done that we'll get
back to today's episode all right guys
read the book and get ready to be the
hero of your own life peace out
one thing that um you've talked about
that i think is uh along these lines be
interesting to see if if they feel as
related to you when you know so much
about it but for me at a high level
these feel very related talked about
somebody gets in a car accident uh
acetylcholine if i'm not mistaken is
released it says [__] pay attention
to this pay attention right now and it
it
basically responds to peaks and valleys
so something really bad happens or
something really good happens it's
present you begin to hardwire
the association of whatever emotion is
with that thing and so
if you have something a traumatic event
or whatever and you now see something is
very negative you can actually flip that
by getting in a state where you're
secreting acetylcholine again and now in
a positive right so that you can feel
good about that thing
so how do people
take that take control of that process
so if you've been in a car accident and
you now have this negative association
with driving how do you grab a hold of
the production of acetylcholine how do
you yeah reframe yeah so it's great
you're mentioning acetylcholine so
acetylcholine is the neurochemical that
we want to think about anytime we're
talking about neural plasticity and in
particular attention high attentional
states so everyone knows that the brain
is very plastic early in life so from
birth until about age 25 you can learn
so much for better or for worse i always
say the downside is that early in life
you're you have less control over your
life circumstances but your brain is
very plastic so there's a you know dark
and light to that later in life you have
a lot more control generally over your
life circumstances but the brain becomes
less plastic however
we know based on nobel prize winning
work and
recent work in addition to that
that the
neuromodulator acetylcholine is secreted
when we pay attention to something very
specific it acts as sort of a spotlight
in the brain making certain synapses the
connections between neurons more active
and more likely to be active again than
others so when you hear that song that
you love so much and it moves you and
you feel dopamine being pulsed into your
body that's a real thing you're actually
getting dopamine secretion you've formed
that deep association with that and
acetylcholine draws your attention to
that and that song is essentially wired
in a very indelible way into your
nervous system multiple you can probably
even with certain songs you can feel
your body start to energize because of
course the brain through connections
with your muscles controls your body
so
for things that are traumatic or
negative what we're really talking about
is neuroplasticity that's focused on
unlearning and most of the therapies for
this whether or not it's emdr eye
movement desensitization reprocessing or
it's traditional psychoanalysis and
psychotherapy or it's somatic embodied
release
you know kundalini breathing type almost
all of those are designed to do
something which is to bring the person
or you bring yourself
into a state of heightened alertness
right you can't do this stuff when
you're sort of half asleep heightened
alertness and then focusing your
attention on the traumatic or negative
event this is the way that it works and
then pairing that was something new you
know traditionally this was done with
things like nlp or in talk therapy where
people would feel
the relation the positive relationship
with the therapist that was kind of the
main rationale
in association with this very traumatic
sometimes even you know shameful type
events and the idea is that you you
would simultaneously have those two
experiences the negative one and the
feeling of safety and you would rewire
those circuitries i actually believe
that can work but it can take a lot of
times it can take a lot of visits to the
therapist which is not to say it's bad
it's just not everyone has access to
those resources
things like eye movement desensitization
reprocessing simply moving the eyes
laterally while recounting these
negative events the woman who devised
this
figured out
that somehow when people recount these
traumatic experiences when they're doing
these lateralized eye movements not
vertical eye movements they
somehow
separate out the negative emotions and i
thought for years people would ask me
about this stuff tom and i thought this
is ridiculous first of all i'm a vision
scientist and i work on stress it's like
there's no way and then i really ate my
words because four papers two in humans
two in mice and then a fifth paper
published in nature which is kind of our
super bowl of scientific publishing
showed that these lateralized eye
movements quiet the amygdala they
actually suppress activation of this
threat detection center in the amygdala
and why would that be true ah so this is
really where it gets cool turns out
because of
when the way that we view the visual
world when we move through space when
our head moves or when we walk and
things flow past us that these
lateralized eye movements
are what happens when you move forward
in space when you're walking when you're
moving forward towards something and
that suppresses
activation of the amygdala now you say
why well okay so then 2018
my laboratory did an experiment there
was actually graduates in my laboratory
where we're looking at fear in this case
we're looking at fear to big looming
objects that either trigger freezing or
running and hiding there's a brain area
that's in your brain and my brain that
mice also have that triggers a third
option not run and hide
not freeze but forward confrontation
this is the no i'm gonna fight i'm gonna
move forward in the face of diversity
this is the growth mindset i'm going to
lean into friction and it turns out that
this circuit is linked to the dopamine
reward pathway when we move forward
in the face of a threat and obviously we
want to do this in healthy adaptive ways
we suppress activity of the amygdala
through physical action of moving
forward and there's a signal sent to the
areas of the brain that control dopamine
reward
those reward centers then trigger the
release of dopamine to reward forward
effort in the face of stress or threat
so when you hear about people saying
look take some physical action when
you're feeling exhausted take some
forward physical action when you're
feeling overwhelmed by this traumatic
experience now that could be in the form
of a walk in the now this therapist she
figured out with emdr because you can't
take people walking around for therapy
sessions she figured out that these
lateralized eye movements are what
trigger suppression of the amygdala and
it makes perfect sense because the
amygdala this threat detection center in
our brain it doesn't connect to the
limbs so how does it know if you're
moving forward well because the eyes are
moving you have these reflexive
movements that move anytime you're
moving through space
so
to make this a little more succinct it's
really forward movement action pushing
yourself across that threshold not only
rewards you but it suppresses activity
of the fear centers in the brain and
these are ancient hardwired mechanisms
these aren't hacks these are things that
mother nature installed in us
so i love this more than you could
possibly imagine
uh this is so interesting um one of the
things that i've heard talked about i
think is really powerful is that
overcoming a fear isn't about um
diminishing
the fear response it's about
making more robust a sense of being
brave in the face of that fear um so
moving forward to translate it to you
know
like you say if if your brain is meant
to interpret stimuli
what at a stimulus level what is that
thing that's going to trigger the
response
talk about the the i don't know if it
was mice or rats i think it was rats
where you force them to fight and
they're like in a tube and you like that
that study to me tied with what you just
said is insanely powerful especially for
people who've allowed themselves to
become paralyzed by you know fear or
whatever forward movement provided it
doesn't endanger you or kill you is
absolutely the remedy for
fear stress and all and at least in the
clinical literature to these sort of
trauma events you know that that people
carry with them for many years of course
trauma needs to be dealt with hopefully
with a professional but we can all apply
these mechanisms and these neurochemical
reward schedules so that the study that
you're referring to is a beautiful one
um
there's a classic study where
researchers not my lab put two rats or
you could do this with mice into a tube
and the tendency is for them to try and
push one or the other one out one always
wins and pushes the other one out we
call the one that got pushed out the
loser the one that pushed him out the
winner
here are the interesting things about
this
first of all the winner
will tend to win with other in other
battles even though these are just
pushing battles
more because it simply won the time
before the loser by losing will tend to
lose and so people say oh well that
explains a lot about society etc well
here's where it gets really interesting
you can even take a mouse or a rat and
push it from behind and make it the
winner and then on subsequent trials
where you're not pushing it it will tend
to win more often so the win doesn't
even have to come from itself
so last year there was a very important
paper published about this where a set
of researchers just said well what is it
like what is this winning circuit and
this losing circuit enough with the
demonstration that this happens like
what's happening on what's under the
hood and so they went into the brain and
they identified
a brain area which is part of the
frontal cortex the area that we
typically think about planning action
executive function all the kind of high
level stuff
and what they
discovered was this brain area is more
active in the winter
than in the loser in fact they could
take the loser and over stimulate this
area and turn the losers into winners
now it gets even more ridiculous than
that if you quiet this brain area
winners become losers okay
and
and if you take a winner
and let's say at this tube battle and
you put them into let's say a cold
environment with a bunch of other mice
and you have just a warm corner mice
don't like to be cold
and you say who gets the warm corner
right who gets the luxury spot it's
always the winner so it even breaks down
at the level of social interactions and
so you say okay all right now we know
that's this brain error it's this it's
this one area of the frontal cortex but
what's it actually doing right okay
what's it actually tran what how can we
translate this turns out this brain area
that's responsible and required for
winning in this series of experiments
is actually driving up the level of
activation
what you and i would call agitation or
stress to the point where that animal is
more likely to move forward it's simply
taking stress which is
wired into us in order to make us feel
agitated instead of
suppressing us you know instead of
saying you know i'm just going to sit
here i'm overwhelmed i'm not going to
i'm just going to move into action so
there's a circuit for winning there's a
the same circuit when it's
hypoactive not active enough is what
causes losing in these competitive
scenarios and similarly there's a
circuit for quitting there's an a
norepinephrine circuit in the brainstem
this was published in the last couple
years showing that when animals or
people are in constant effort eventually
that level of norepinephrine gets so
high that it triggers a circuit that
shuts down the motor control over the
limbs and you just say that's it i give
up i'm done so these mechanisms were
hardwired into us we all have them
whether or not it's from evolution
mother nature god the universe it is
it's irrelevant to the discussion that
these circuits exist in everybody and i
think it's a select few people who
really understand that forward action
is what drives these circuits it's
the ability to take that agitation
stress agitation increase our focus and
they bias us for movement and nature
wanted that they want us to move forward
in the face of challenge not to be
quiescent we weren't sitting around
battling tigers and saber-toothed tigers
all the time more likely we were in
caves and we were getting hungry and we
had to go out and search for things
agitation and stress were designed to
get us up and move us and when we try
and fight that too much and we try and
quiet that stress
that actually can be problematic you
have to decide are you going to try and
quiet stress or are you going to
actually lean into action that's
critical choice point for everybody
who's experienced anything negative or
positive for that
matter dude that that is so useful in
terms of getting people to understand
how to get themselves out of it and this
goes back to this notion that um
your thoughts are ultimately a choice
like you get to decide what you think
about and when you understand that
you're living in this vr environment and
that there are things like simply moving
forward is going to make you feel
entirely different that you're being
essentially manipulated by evolution by
nature or however you want to think
about it to get you agitated enough to
go out and do the things you need to do
but that it has this just feedback loop
of how it makes you feel about yourself
that winning begets winning and losing
begets losing but it's it isn't like at
some sort of grand untangible level that
it's happening at the level of
neurochemistry that there are regions of
the brain that are designed for this so
how can somebody begin to turn things
around in their life because i know one
thing that people really struggle with
is they have this negative voice in
their head that's just playing this loop
and so
even if they understand the mechanisms
some part of them is going to discount
it right because it's like well you're
just trying to say that because you
think you can manipulate neurochemistry
but you you're a loser like you just
fall night and that's what's playing in
their head how do people go in and and
really take the reins of that process so
that they can start winning yeah great
question so you know i'm never going to
argue that we can subjectively control
all of our experience because there's
some things that just genuinely suck
right and when they and it's important
and it's important to register those
those not so great events or terrible
events because they can drive us also
you know we can be driven from a place
of anger frustration and and you know
revenge or we can be driven from a place
of you know love gratitude and etc i i'm
not here to judge which one is better or
worse but the nervous system doesn't
distinguish between them so if you're
the kind of person that needs to you
know kind of budge yourself into
something great if you're the kind of
person that wants to do things from more
of a warm fuzzy feeling that's fine too
what i will say is this the ability to
tap into this dopamine reward system
which
is activated anytime you're in pursuit
of something that's outside the
boundaries of your skin and literally
the boundaries of your body as well as
the reward system the serotonin oxytocin
system which is really about the things
that are contained within your own body
and immediate experience things like
gratitude and you know
touch and comfort and things like that
with loved ones
the ability to tap into both is crucial
now you said something really important
which was well negative thoughts
negative thoughts what to do i don't
believe that it's very easy to suppress
negative thoughts
however
when you realize that thoughts can be
deliberately introduced you can start
replacing negative thoughts with new
types of thoughts so you can always add
something in but when people start to
realize that thoughts are very much like
physical actions of reaching and picking
up a glass of water or taking a jog
around the block or typing an email
perfectly this is something i sometimes
do because i'm i you know i struggle to
do the perfect email not all my emails
are perfect but when i do one i make
sure that i i complete and i think okay
it's possible it's not because the email
being perfect is so important it's
because i want to remind myself that my
thoughts and my actions are essentially
the same the nervous system can organize
thoughts so for somebody that's
struggling
you know we have these examples like oh
they were really back on their heels or
they were so depleted no money and all
this stuff what are they gonna we have
so many examples like that but in trying
to make it actionable it's really about
saying yep that's all true
but i'm going to introduce a thought
which is i made it through today
i'm
i made it through today and that's
actually worth celebrating at a micro
level so if you can
give yourself dopamine rewards in small
increments right you're not trying to
celebrate that you made it through one
day sometimes that's a huge feat but
most of the time you just want to dose
yourself with a little bit of that
internal release of dopamine
you start rewarding incremental steps
and if there's anything that your
listeners could take away from this
whole thing about dopamine and reward
schedules and being in movement it's
reward incremental steps
in particular
incremental steps that are about forward
action so maybe that's writing an email
maybe that's
um maybe that's that run around the
block maybe that's something much
grander for you as you get better at
things right the stairs get further and
further away from one another because
you've achieved more success and so they
tend to be you have to take the rungs on
the ladder are further apart so to speak
that's a time when you really need to
implement not only the dopamine rewards
but also those serotonin and oxytocin
rewards etc so to make it actionable i
would say remember don't spend so much
time trying to suppress negative
thoughts if you need trauma therapy
pursue that with a professional but if
you have negative thoughts just remember
i can also introduce positive thoughts
the same way i can control running
around the block positive thoughts are
the equivalent of forward physical
action and if you reward them internally
you buffer yourself against the quitting
circuit this norepinephrine circuit we
were talking about before you are
building a stronger version of yourself
completely between your own ears and
some people say well that's silly it's
like you're saying oh i'm going to jump
up and down reward myself for doing
nothing no you're building the neural
circuits that reward that you can
control self-reward and in doing that
you can push through days and weeks of
effort consistently i don't mean
necessarily all-nighters but you can
push and push and push
you know my career is one that was made
over two decades it wasn't we had our
big you know peaks and we had a lot of
valleys but
learning to control these rewards is
absolutely key and i know you've done
this too tom it's like you know it the
huge wins are great but it's really
about rewarding these increments so you
can keep going another 30 another 40
years 50 years 100 years if that's how
long you know if david sinclair has his
way you know we'll live a hundred more
years all of us so
yeah people if people learn to tie
things to the process then they've got a
real shot um
the the
success is not guaranteed but the
struggle is right so if you are
able to
get to the point where you get excited
about the learning process you get
excited about trying something even if
you fail that if you can associate in
your own mind that i feel better about
who i am because i tried this thing
then it begins to stack because even the
failures become something that you learn
and so you actually have made some
progress because you took action because
you tried something and now
understanding you know some of the brain
mechanisms around it it really gets
super powerful one thing about dopamine
that i just want to make sure i
uh mention and it based on something you
said earlier is that
one interesting question about the brain
is just asking the question you know how
do we segment time how do we how do you
know that this podcast has obviously has
a beginning in the middle and an end but
you know how do we segment time and so
there have been some beautiful
experiments done recently showing that
uh for instance
if you're watching a sports game
regardless of whether or not your team
scores like let's say basketball goes
down court let's say they missed the
three-pointer and then you know it's a
close game there's a little blip of
dopamine that says that was one segment
of time
and so dopamine is a big way in which we
segment time the other way are blinks
believe it or not
yeah that every time we blink there's a
paper published in current biology every
time we blink we reset our perception of
that when i understand more i guess than
the dopamine why would dopamine be
involved in time perfect question turns
out that the frequency of blinking is
set by the level baseline level of
dopamine in the brain yes so when people
are wide-eyed with excitement and
they're and they're just they're not
blinking very often or someone is on a
drug that kicks out a lot of dopamine
they hardly ever blink their pupils are
huge
they're they're actually not segmenting
time in the normal fashion
and so much of your life in retrospect
is segmented by those peaks and dopamine
they those mark key events in your life
when you met your wife uh that there
there are all the segments of your life
are
noted by peaks and dopamine or the way
that you happen to conceptualize
dopamine and so also people who are
depressed are often very focused on the
past they ruin naturally they default to
ruminating on the past when you adjust
people's dopamine levels to healthy
levels they start becoming more forward
thinking and more present and so there's
this relationship between blinking and
time perception dopamine and blinking
how you conceptualize time has a lot to
do with these peaks and dopamine and
when they occur
and this is a big deal because we're you
know 2020 was a rough year for most
people 2021's feeling a little better
but we don't really know where we are in
this whole arc of everything that's
happening
there's a lot of uncertainty yeah
the dopamine peaks and the frequency of
those dopamine peaks have everything to
do with how we carve up our experience
of time and anyone who spent a lot of
time in deep meditation
starts to develop a kind of intuitive
internal representation of the fact that
time is very fluid in this way when we
say time is fluid what we mean is the
secretion of dopamine and these pulses
is very fluid they are under control of
our of what's happening externally but
also how you conceptualize your life
like where are you in your life are you
you know hopefully will if david
sinclair has his way and hopefully he
will we will all live to be you know
more than a hundred years old
hopefully in good vitality so this is
the more esoteric aspect of dopamine
fast before we go about the time thing
yeah let me ask you so there was a
period in my life i'll peg it at about
two years where for whatever reason i it
could have been six hours since i last
looked at a clock i would be within
three minutes of what time it was and my
wife found it hilarious and so she'd be
like what time is it and i'm like oh
it's 4 58.
it was so weird that it like made my
radar is like oh my god i have like this
special power and then it went away
and now i can probably get you within 15
minutes but like uh it was really eerie
is is there does that make a prediction
or around like a consistency of dopamine
release or something yeah you nailed it
it's the consistency that's an internal
it's an interval timer as we say so when
people's dopamine is low they tend to
overestimate okay okay
and when people's dopamine is high they
tend to underestimate time now it is
true that dopamine when it's released is
a little bit of a stimulant in the
system because of the way it works with
epinephrine how finely you slice time is
very dependent on dopamine and your
internal level of autonomic arousal a
really good example would be you're
really excited about something or you're
really stressed about something doesn't
matter dopamine is
elevated in excitement but
norepinephrine epinephrine tend to be
elevated any time we're agitated or or
excited
just imagine you need to catch a flight
you're in line at the security and the
person in front of you seems like
they're going really really slowly your
frame rate is faster you're just carving
up time more finely people are in car
accidents and then they report
everything being in slow motion your
frame rate is is
smaller you're essentially getting
you're taking larger time bins and this
is why let's say you wake up and you're
really tired or you're just you're kind
of out of it and you're looking it's
like text messages and emails and all
this stuff the world seems like it's
going by really really fast
dopamine is what is the is the dynamic
process by dopamine release i should say
is the dynamic process by which you
adjust time perception so if you had a
very keen perception of the passage of
time right down to the minute or so that
suggests very regular intervals of
dopamine release and that's probably
tied to outside events that are below
your conscious awareness
but
uh dopamine releases i sort of
not to make this uh pg-13 or r-rated but
if we go back to the example of sex sex
and sleep are the two times when space
and time have a very fluid type
relationship it's very
hard to conceive space and time in sleep
that's actually the nature of sleep is
we do the long blink no joke we close
the shutters stop bringing in external
information and in sleep space and time
are very fluid right things can happen
very fast or very slow slow motion you
can be flying it there's a lot of you
know some of it is dreaming but space
and time are very fluid in wakefulness
space and time are very anchored by
physical events in the world but our
perception of those is dynamically
regulated by how much dopamine is in our
system so it's beginning to sound like
dopamine does everything but it's really
associated with motivation craving and
time interval keeping and so i would be
willing to bet that your pulses of
dopamine were very regular just like
drops
so interesting so we do a lot of things
who knows what i was doing at that
period if it had to do anything just
that i'm getting older and so it starts
to disrupt itself who knows but
what are some things so one thing i've
heard you talk about which i find really
interesting
when i think about all the things that
we're doing that are disrupting things
all these unintended consequences of
modern behavior
i am truly glad that
cell phones the internet and pornography
did not exist when i was younger because
i don't know if at 14 i could have been
disciplined enough if i had access to
that
and
what like when you think about the
things that we're doing right now that
are sort of the that have maybe the most
grand unintended consequences where do
you land
yeah on the time scale 24 hours one of
the the huge mistakes that we all make
and i'm i've said this many times so if
people have heard me say this before
forgive me but it turns out it's still
true
uh
getting too much bright light exposure
from the hours of 10 pm until 4 a.m
unless you have to work shift work which
is a unique case
that bright light exposure between 10 pm
and 4 am even if you
adjust the colors of the lights you
still need to get everything really
really dim because it actually
blocks the release of dopamine through a
pathway that involves a structure called
the hebenula
the habenula was a cryptic structure in
the brain for a long time but now we
know there's a punishment signal in the
brain you get neurochemically punished
for viewing bright light at those hours
how how would that be wired in we'd
never be able to expose ourselves to
bright light ah so that's a great
question so firelight won't do that
moonlight's fine candles lights that are
dim are now in your environment
so the the pathway to the habenula and
then to these dopamine reducing circuits
are the pain pathway that we're
referring to earlier it's a generic
pathway through which lots of different
types of signals and stimuli and events
can punish us internally this is so good
dude and so i'm going to call this the
rich kid effect
like there and you mentioned hard work
earlier
there is a reason i think that children
of wealthy parents end up imploding
because
there is a an evolutionary the
punishment pathway evolutionary thing
that's going on that says you didn't
have to work hard for the things you own
and because from uh i need you to go
hunt and gather and face a saber-toothed
tiger i have to reward you for doing
hard things and punish you for not doing
hard things well and
you know in the case of the the
the generic model of the of the spoiled
rich kid it they actually can't access
dopamine uh remember that that a movie
from the 80s it was a uh it was called
like the toy or something with richard i
was like if this [__] says toy
i'm gonna have a seizure yes
richard pryor in that movie and the kid
has everything and he's the he's the
epitome of the spoiled brat all the toys
all the cars all the things now we see
this with people who actually go from
rags to riches and then bathe in all
their the luxuries they didn't have as a
child these are often the athletes that
don't go on to perform well again
these are people that crash because of
other dopamine-seeking behaviors you
know i'm not going to call out names but
there are far too many examples of these
and i don't call out names mostly
because we are all capable of this we
all would like to think that oh if i had
all that money or if i had all that
success i would really be a good human
being and i wouldn't do those things
anyone any human being that is immersed
in these dopamine circuits too much or
who gets too much pleasure without
having to pursue it first and really
work and
actually experience pain pleasure
ratcheting back and forth along that
climb because it wasn't just dopamine
like this for you it's probably pain
pleasure pain pleasure pain pleasure
pain right they're always proportional
to one another
so anyone that does that it has a
tremendously hard time accessing
pleasure
they can't do that and and we often
think about the extremes of addiction
and those are really severe but we also
have to think about the more subtle
forms of something we really love but
indulging in it just a little too often
so that it no longer has that edge
you know there have been really good
studies of people who jump out of
airplanes with parachutes you know
i'm sure it's a lot of fun it looks like
a thrill but people do it over and over
and over again
often die
doing other things they often become
drug addicts because it's a huge high oh
yeah yeah a lot of that
and you know there are a lot of examples
of this i mean you can get addicted to
anything the key is to regulate that
behavior so you asked what
you know what should people do well
certainly
i'm trying this now and i have some good
examples some young people i know and
work with are taking breaks from not
just social media but no cell phone
whatsoever i'm actually trying an odd
experiment which is
for the first hour of every day no phone
mostly because part of your 25 no goes
yes
right so we have circuitry in the brain
related to the so-called basal ganglia
and we have go so activating you know
think gas pedal and then we there's a
lot of no-go circuitry
and
learning how to keep that no-go don't
circuitry as we could call it
uh tuned up is very important and so
many times throughout the day but i try
and get 25 a day where i actively
refrain from doing something that i
impulsively want to do could be looking
at my phone but it could even be
something trivial like i want to walk to
the kitchen and get a glass of water so
i'm actively engaging in
self de in in denial not cognitive
denial probably that too but how would i
know um but in action-based denial so
restricting my behavior in some way as a
way of keeping these dopamine circuits
tuned up also not looking at my phone
first thing in the morning for an hour
because
knowing what we now know about the
second phase of sleep and rem sleep
being more predominant the second wave
of sleep and the fact that you're
working through a lot of emotional and
logistical contingencies you're
reshaping your brain in sleep that's
when neuroplasticity occurs during sleep
it's triggered in wakefulness but it
actually takes place
in sleep especially that second half of
sleep
when you wake up in the morning you are
in a perfect position to what i call
receive the download of all the work
that your neural circuitry has been
doing the night before but if you
immediately go to a sensory experience
especially a rich sensory experience of
stuff scrolling by you're actually
missing the information that you
processed at night and even more
importantly that second half of the
night during rem sleep is when the
emotional weight of things start becomes
let's say
you put it on the shelf properly things
that are important to emotional
emotionally register get put in one
shelf things that were like the comment
you got on twitter that was triggering
doesn't seem like such a big deal after
a good night's sleep and that's because
that second half of sleep is actually
when you re-experience these things but
your body can't secrete adrenaline it's
kind of an internal form of therapy or
even trauma therapy and that's why
people who don't get that sleep are very
you know they're easily agitated they
feel like the world is crushing down on
them so when i wake up in the morning i
want to receive ideas that i want to
learn from my learning and if you take
in new information you are not in a
position to do that and 60 minutes is a
tough one so i give myself two no-gos
for the 60-minute block if i can do it
and i'll tell you a lot of mornings i
fail tom i don't do it interesting i
just i found that shocking but i heard
you say that in another interview and i
was like well i mean i'm human you know
there are mornings where
um i get enticed or worse
worse i find myself reflexively picking
up the phone without having made the
conscious decision and that's when
i realized that
you know we are all deep in this process
and i think
uh we have to regulate it the experiment
i'd like to do maybe you'll do this with
me as a challenge because the challenge
is always good is in the new year i
actually want to take every odd waking
hour of the day off the phone so even
hours of the day
as long as it's waking i'm willing to
have it on and work with it but odd
hours just turn it off no matter what
i don't know if this will destroy most
of the relationships
but just to see can i do it on a rigidly
externally imposed schedule because if
you think about most of the growth in
life comes from these rigidly externally
imposed schedules and we hate them
but they are where we learn restraint
dude this is so important i don't know
if i hate them anymore so people will
often ask like how i do this that or the
other whatever it is like tom how do you
um
so i work 93 hours a week that's like my
average that's your average so
tom why do you work 93 hours every week
and the answer is because 93 are joyful
and 94 wouldn't
and
when i start working more than that it
usually means that i'm juggling so many
things that my brain seems to be using
sleep as a way to track some of them or
something yeah so i find myself waking
up a lot now i have a trick that allows
me to fall back asleep very fast but
it's still not as restful as just
sleeping through the night what's the
trick if you don't mind me into it i
don't at all so i have two pairs of
airpod headphones
and i put them in
and i put them on a
fiction book and i turn the volume down
such that if i don't put a little bit of
pressure on my ear i can't make out what
they're saying so as soon as i drift off
the pressure releases and i can still
hear that noise is being made but i
can't track it and so i'm usually out
probably in about three minutes wow that
that changed my life in terms of when i
get stressed i can still fall back
asleep such a great skill and just
reflecting on what you use
that murmur in the background and this
kind of low level i can't quite detect
it is actually the way that your brain
detects things as you're falling asleep
so i wonder if you've triggered your
circuit to run in reverse where you
actually can send yourself back under
what what it makes me think is that i
can't
process the problems
and listen to
a story at the same time and so my brain
clicks over into story mode and it's
like oh we're digesting this story i i'm
getting input so
because i'm getting input because it's
story my brain lets go of i have to
solve problems
and then that allows me to fall right
back to sleep that's great such a great
skill and waking up in the middle of the
night from time to time to use the
bathroom is actually quite normal um and
some people are really obsessed by the
fact oh no i woke up and then they get
triggered but i learned this last year
that the
peak in our alertness is actually about
90 minutes before our natural bedtime
and a lot of people they you know they
reach the point in the evening where
they're ready to go to sleep and then
they feel all this you know excitement
and surge of energy and they think oh no
i'm not going to be able to fall asleep
but that's actually a natural surge
that's followed by a dip a lot of people
also have the trouble of waking up in
the middle of the night and wondering
why they can't fall back asleep this is
dreadfully hard for a lot of people i
struggled that for years yeah and one of
the solutions is to go to bed earlier
because it means that your melatonin is
starting to get released early in the
evening and so we all have the natural
ability to push to stay late stay up
later if we really need to this has
obvious adaptive utility but some people
by who should go to bed quote unquote
should go to bed at 9 or 10 p.m they're
pushing to 11 or 12 and then their
melatonin signal is starting to drop off
now they can't fall asleep
or they're waking up at two or three in
the morning and they're they're in
trouble but it sounds like you've hit
the right schedule 93 hours is an
impressive output um that's a lot of
years of making an obscene amount of
mistakes and to close the loop on so
people how do you accomplish xyz and the
answer is partly rules
so you have to be obsessed with your
goal right so for me that's all
obsessions start with a goal what do you
want is that thing exciting and
honorable assuming it's exciting and
honorable there's ways to like create
feedback loops which is largely what
we've been talking about today about
attaching the dopaminergic response
specifically to the pursuit of that
thing rather than having it
and
by
to because i'm so excited and because i
so believe in the reality of my goals
that i actually could have them and that
having them would be awesome
i can create rules in my life and then i
really stick to those rules so once i'm
very careful about what rules i put in
place because i have to believe that
they will actually lead me to this goal
that's really exciting for me but if i
believe it then i can put them in and
then also part of my identity is that
i'm the type of person that when i set a
rule i follow it so i can create this
loop of like feeling good about myself
and the thing that i'm pursuing but it
really works and i'm shocked how few
people have the kind of rule that you're
talking about in the new year to say hey
i'm only going to do odd hours there's
no phone yeah well and like i said i'm
not perfect i'm not as disciplined as
you are about my no goes i try i
actually find that tabulating is is kind
of fun
um it's also fun to get really
triggering comments
and and to not close the dopamine loop
for them i think if people understood
the dopamine reward prediction error
that we could end all the um
amplifying comment battles online
because what happens is if someone takes
a a jab at you of any kind there's
actually an open dopamine loop waiting
for you to respond and any response
actually gives them that that dopamine
response of success it's a little bit of
a it's like scoring a three-pointer and
the no response actually drops their
dopamine below baseline and that's its
own form of retaliation and i have to be
careful because i don't want to
encourage people to retaliate but any
anything that short-circuits the kind of
madness of getting pulled into
some online battle that's totally
meaningless it's taking people away from
other powerful good things that they
could do in the world
you know we've been talking mainly about
dopamine and its scheduling and about
the fact that it can be attached to
anything i think
many people find it hard to subjectively
attach dopamine to something they don't
want to do this is something that uh if
we'd spoken a year ago i wouldn't i my
answer would have been a little bit
different to the question of how do you
get motivated well one way to do that is
if you are good at subjectively
attaching
dopamine to the pursuit just knowing
okay i really am hungry for this i'm
just go i'm gonna tell myself that you
know making you know making it one
percent of the way is a success and i'm
gonna keep going and i'm gonna keep
ratcheting on and that's great if you
can do that but for people that can't do
that understanding this relationship
with a pleasure pain balance can be more
powerful just understanding the more
friction and pain that you experience
the greater the dopamine reward you will
get later and that serves as its own
amplifier of the whole process of
pursuing more dopamine and then the
other aspect of it
is that any time that we're leaning into
action
you know it has the
possibility of being an amplifying
process or a depleting process
and the key to that is making sure that
you're balancing the dopamine and
epinephrine systems you know epinephrine
being this molecule of universal
currency of energy output
could be out of hate or could be out of
love epinephrine doesn't care and
actually dopamine doesn't care none of
these systems care about us they just
work underneath our underneath our
conscious control but when you start to
understand that
hitting the gas pedal is great but
hitting the gas pedal and then coming
off the gas pedal a little bit
you can kind of sit in a more relaxed
rpm actually allows you to go much
further i think that people
leaning into action is terrific i always
say you can either be back on your heels
flat footed or forward center of mass
the best situation is actually to be
right upright but just know that you can
be forward center of mass at any point
and you know that to take it back to sex
and reproduction because it's a salient
example
the arc of of sex is very interesting
because when you think about autonomic
arousal it turns out that the the
arousal stage of sex actually involves
release of dopamine but is what we call
parasympathetic dominant it's actually
has to be relaxed enough
in order to occur okay everyone can read
between the lines on this
orgasm is actually
a
i want to say full blown it's a it's a
it is a sympathetic
nervous system driven response it's
identical to the stress system it's
driven by the same neural circuits as
stress
and then what comes afterward
the parasympathetic system goes back up
again it's that deep relaxation so why
do i say this not to talk about sex to
be
you know to to serve as a highlighter
but rather our species arrived here
because of this dance between arousal
and relaxation arousal and relaxation
and one thing we can say for sure about
every human being that's alive now is
that their parents at least once
mastered this dance of relaxed but not
and excited but not too excited then
really excited and then relaxed that
dance was mastered by all of our parents
and that's what delivered us here to
some extent and so i
what this means is that all the neural
circuits from the ones that led to our
conception to the ones that lead to us
pursuing goals have this
balance that's almost like a like a
seesaw right there's activation and calm
activation and calm and it's that
dynamic process that's important to
master in every endeavor so we use sex
as an example but in pursuit of goals
you have to learn how to pursue
short-term goals
and like the goals within the day make a
cup of coffee and go and long-term goals
and when i said dopamine is what's
setting the
your time perception it's an interval
timer
what you're saying is it's like the two
marshmallow experiment done at stanford
def defer the dopamine
and actually if you can turn the
weighting into the dopamine and then
you can extend out the reward for you
know waiting for the second marshmallow
15 minutes later et cetera et cetera and
there are many many examples of this in
the psychology and neuroscience
literature and i would say finally in
2020 we finally as a field got a clear
idea of how dopamine is really working
because before it was all about
work dopamine hit right sex gives you a
double when you hit the internet gives
you a dopamine what we didn't realize is
that repeated engagement with these
things leads to dopamine depletion
and that the pain and pleasure balance
is always at work hello my friend you
know that i believe success requires you
to see failure as the ultimate learning
tool success requires you to be
disciplined and gritty and to never ever
quit on your dreams i say all of that
because one thing is certain the road to
achieving your goal is not smooth or
linear i wish it was but it's not it's
going to be bumpy sometimes scary some
days you'll take two steps forward and
slide 10 steps back and that's why
success also requires you to know how to
pull yourself out of a rut and get
unstuck fast life is short you can't be
messing around with your goals you've
got to make progress every single day so
i've pulled a class from impact theory
university called how to get unstuck
which you can watch for free with the
link on your screen or by clicking below
when you join me for that free preview
of that workshop from impact theory
university i'm going to teach you my
strategy for how to
understand exactly where you need to be
going how to identify the obstacle
that's blocking you and the best way to
make the most progress towards that goal
and keep your momentum right click that
link and let's get to work all right
i'll see you on the inside i'm super
interested in something you said which
is ultimately our thoughts or a choice
i'd love to start with that i'd love to
start with
your sort of i think really insightful
definition about what a growth mindset
really is
yeah well first of all carol is a
wonderful colleague and friend and so
we've been doing a bit of work on the
neuroscience of growth mindset among
other states of mind so
you know the study of neuroscience is
really about what the nervous system
does and
amazingly enough the nervous system is
responsible for everything that happens
to us from the time that we're born
until the time we die
but that really boils down to only five
things
the nervous system
has the responsibility of sensation
so sensing the physical events in the
environment we have these so-called
receptors in the eyes and the ears and
the nose and the mouth on the skin
that take physical entities in the in
the universe that are real fixed
non-negotiable things like sound waves
and photons of light and chemicals in
the environment traveling that make it
into our nose and things like that
and convert those into the second thing
which is perceptions
so the nervous system's responsibility
is to take those sensations which are
non-negotiable and
perceive certain ones and not others so
for instance right now until i say you
know what's the sensation of your feet
contacting the floor or the bottoms of
your shoes you weren't thinking about it
but those pressure receptors were being
engaged the entire time so your
perception
is like a window or a spotlight that's
very much linked to attention
then there are emotions often called
feelings
and those are really designed
to push us down particular avenues of
perception and
the next thing which are thoughts
okay so we've got sensation perception
feelings and then there are thoughts
which really have a lot to do with what
we're perceiving and the way we're
organizing those perceptions what they
mean and generally that's put into the
context of what we already know or
memories and then the fifth thing is
behaviors
or actions and of course neurons are
responsible for generating actions and
they're really two kinds of actions
there are the actions that you generate
reflexively like your breathing and your
heart rate right now are largely
reflexive or you could decide troll of
your respiration
and be make it voluntary right and not
just reflexive so those five things
sensations perceptions feelings thoughts
and actions really encompass all of our
life experience and that's
from the very mundane of getting up in
the morning and brushing your teeth to
the most awe-inspiring uh goal-motivated
uh pinnacle moments of your life the
nervous system not the immune system not
the digestive system all of which are
important but the nervous system meaning
the brain spinal cord and the
connections with the body and the
connections from the body back to the
brain and spinal cord are responsible
for all of that
and as a just a final point the nervous
system is also responsible for telling
the immune system something that's very
relevant right now in this covid
pandemic
when to be active you know we don't
often think about the immune system as
governed by anything but it's actually
governed by
the nervous system
yeah one thing that i find really
interesting is the way that the
and in fact it'll be interesting to hear
your take on this so i think of the
brain as basically creating a virtual
reality environment that we're
engaging in now it's a very usable
virtual environment that i can walk
around without bumping into too much
[__] like you said i can translate um
you know the things that are floating
around in the air into a sense of smell
and i can navigate the world based on
what i see and hear and smell and taste
and all of that stuff but at the end of
the day it really is all happening uh in
this enclosed dark
skull and the brain itself doesn't ever
actually interact with light it doesn't
interact with sound waves it's all an
interpretation of that
which i find really interesting and i
find it really interesting the way that
plays out into our lives how do you
think about that as somebody who
is
literally lifting a brain out of
somebody's i would assume deceased uh
head you know you have such a tactile um
relationship with the brain
yeah so you said something really
important which is that you know we're
essentially just this collection of
cells and yet
everything is organized in this almost
video game virtual reality like version
of the world so the way that
neuroscientists think about these sorts
of things nowadays is in the following
way
that you're absolutely right tom
everything about
life experience is an abstraction and
the brain has a language it's creating
an abstract representation of everything
that's out there in the world
everything
and that might seem sort of obvious to
some of your listeners but when you
think about it
that's perhaps one of the most
interesting and profound features of
life in general the galaxies any
organism because somehow your
abstractions and my abstractions and the
abstractions of the brains of all your
listeners are able to converge on some
common meaning at least in many cases
about what these words mean or what um
different events in the natural world
mean now objects fall down they don't
generally fall up so there are some
rules that we learn very early on that
are obvious right
but there are some other rules that are
less obvious that come about when we
start thinking about things like growth
mindset and what's rewarding what is
punishing what it means to lean in hard
to a problem or what creativity is but i
i want to just mention there's one
exception to all this which is
very interesting and it happens to be
the one that my lab works on so i am
biased in this regard but there's one
piece of your brain
that is outside your skull
in fact you have two
the rest of your central nervous system
is inside your skull and spinal cord
except lining the back of your eye is
the neural retina which is three cell
layers thick meaning it's about as thick
as a credit card
and the neural retina is not attached to
the brain it is brain
the cells in in the neural retina were
deliberately placed during development
they got pushed out of the skull and
deliberately to sense light events in
the environment and not just the shapes
of things and what's moving around out
there but fundamentally to tell the rest
of the brain and nervous system when to
be alert and when to be asleep based on
how much light is in the environment
and the quality of that light
so
viewing morning sunlight
around the time of sunrise
as well as evening sunlight around the
time of sunset not just at sunset rise
and sunset but near those times a couple
hours on either side
is fundamental for instructing the brain
a special collection of neurons right
above the roof of the mouth which then
instructs all the cells of the body when
to be active it's sort of like you're a
factory and you need your digestion to
work on a particular schedule and you
need your spleen to work on another
schedule and it's morning light and
evening light in particular
and the cells that do this
they pay attention not to blue light
everyone's kind of obsessed with blue
light as it relates to this stuff
wrong that's only half the equation it's
the it's the contrast between yellow
light and blue light so in the morning
and at sunset
yellows are getting brighter watch a
sunrise or at some time or sunset and
blues are getting darker and that
contrast is relayed to the brain you
don't perceive it even blind people can
transmit this information into the brain
and it's and it says
make a cortisol pulse early in the day
to give you active you know energy and
agitate your body to go be active and
then it times the onset of the melatonin
pulse in the evening which is going to
put you to sleep
and so when we think about the brain and
the nervous system being isolated it is
isolated but it's a as much as it's a
machine and a collection of cells they
need to work together and they need to
know when to be active and so it's
viewing of morning sunlight in
particular and evening sunlight in
particular that anchors everything that
goes on from the top of your skull to
the bottom of your feet in terms of this
basic thing of when to be alert and when
to be asleep and screens but not just
screens and not just blue light making
their way into the hours of say 11 pm to
4 am
do just the opposite
there was a paper published in cell a
very an excellent journal showing that
bright light activation between 11 pm
and 4 am
sends a signal from the eye to a brain
structure called the habenula the name
doesn't matter but it kicks off a
disappointment circuit it starts
suppressing dopamine and the habenula is
linked to the pancreas right the brain
body connection and starts dysregulating
blood sugar so the keyboard is that why
does it trigger disappointment yeah so
this is very interesting so every
circuit in the brain has a push and a
pull so we have a reward system for
viewing light at the particular times of
day which are morning and evening and
during the day and avoiding bright
lights in the middle of the night but
there's a punishment signal literally
upon a chemical punishment signal
whereby dopamine which is this feel-good
molecule that's essential for things
like growth mindset and pursuit of goals
and
well-being of all sorts is suppressed
when human beings or animals view bright
light in the middle of this dark phase
of their circadian cycle which is
between 11 pm and 4 am approximately and
so nature does this it creates rewards
for doing the right things that move you
in the direction of general adaptation
and wellness and it punishes you mother
nature is kind of a double-edged sword
she's very benevolent when she wants to
be but if you don't obey her rules she
punishes you too and so you have
circuits in the brain that are
pro-depressive and this light viewing in
the from 10 p.m to 4 a.m is a
kicks off a pro-depressive circuit
and they're really
i want to get into some of the other
things that are pro-depressive as well
but before we do that one one thing that
i really want to anchor us to is
what you were saying you're saying that
people have an oversimplified view of
what a growth mindset is you were just
talking about that relationship to
dopamine
give us your sort of brief nutshell
version of what a growth mindset really
is
yeah so carol and i have had a lot of
discussions about this idea of yet i'm
not there yet but that i can't get there
that's the whole principle behind growth
mindset however when you the the
discovery of growth mindset is worth
thinking about so carol's discovery was
these kids
that
for whatever reason
you know
like doing math problems even though
they knew they couldn't get the answers
right these were sure fail problems so
it's the same kind of people that like
doing puzzles and these kids not
surprisingly go on to do phenomenally
well in a number of different areas of
academic pursuit
you know but what's interesting about
growth mindset is that it seems like
there's some attachment of the reward
systems of the brain to the
action or the pursuit of a goal not just
achieving a goal and when we step back
and we look at
what that really entails at a
neurochemical level we have reward
systems in the brain they generally fall
into two categories there are the reward
systems that make you feel really good
with kind of the here and now and
everything that's within the confines of
your skin and the things you already
have you know love of your dog love of
your spouse
gratitude for all the things you happen
to have and that and those are generally
governed by the release of molecules
like serotonin and oxytocin okay
but then there's another reward system
which is the one that drove a lot of
human evolution which is the dopamine
reward system now dopamine is a very
misunderstood molecule it's often talked
about only in the context of reward like
i'm going to work to this goal i'm going
to build my company i'm going to you
know get tenure as a professor whatever
it is and you reach it and you get this
dopamine reward and indeed that's true
but what's often not discussed is that
dopamine is secreted enroute to rewards
while you pursue rewards
now
the ability to tap into that system
to subjectively amplify that pathway of
reward in pursuit of goals is an
absolute game changer when it comes to
things like
anything challenging that of long
duration or uncertainty or getting
through this cove you know pandemic
situation
the
but the amazing thing is remember the
brain only does five things and we get
to decide which of those sensations and
perceptions have relevance and which
ones don't or which ones are attached to
a goal and which ones aren't so growth
mindset in its purest form is the
attachment of these reward systems to
the effort process to the friction
process and not just to obtaining a
reward and just as a kind of final point
to that there's a very um well-known
body of literature and neuroscience at
least among neuroscientists that talks
about something called reward prediction
error and it says
if you can dose the dopamine
subjectively as you go through the
pursuit of something and then have a lot
of dopamine when you reach that thing
it's very likely that you're going to
reinforce that circuit there will be
neural plasticity and that circuit will
become stronger so the next time you
will revisit those sets of behaviors the
opposite can happen too
where you're in real anticipation of
something this is gonna be great this is
gonna be great this can be great and
then you reach that goal and it's kind
of underwhelming and that generally
triggers this the circuit that i
referred to earlier this kind of
disappointment or pro-depressive circuit
so dopamine
is involved in reward but it's also
involved in the pursuit of rewards and
so as you reach a milestone or as you
tell yourself
i'm on the right track this friction i'm
feeling this late night this early
morning this hard conversation with
somebody that doesn't feel good i'm
going to tell myself this is for a
larger purpose that's that subjective
insertion that abstraction that we're
talking about earlier and when you start
releasing dopamine to those kinds of
things there's essentially no limit on
the
number of things you can do or the
energy to do them so just as a last last
point about dopamine when we're in
effort we're always secreting adrenaline
we're always in pursuit and it's
draining it's tiring
dopamine has this beautiful capacity to
buffer adrenaline and you know this
you've experienced this before because
if you've ever been working really
really hard maybe your team has depleted
everything's just a mess and somebody
cracks a joke and all of a sudden in an
instant it's like everything's reframed
that couldn't have been hormonal
hormones work on that on the schedule of
like hours to days to weeks it had to be
neurochemical it absolutely had to be
neurochemical and that neural chemical
is dopamine dude what you just described
is literally the scientific breakdown of
how you turn your life around i would
just tell people that that subjective
insertion is one of the most powerful
concepts i have ever heard in
neuroscience you're the only one i've
ever heard articulate it that succinctly
now you talk a lot about meaning
walk me through like the how we assign
meeting how we leverage the reward and
punishment to to really
get us in a situation where we can push
through something other people might not
be able to push through yeah so when you
start thinking about things like growth
mindset in terms of how they convert to
neurochemical signatures it leads us to
this place of okay if it's all
subjective then you know if i just say
look i'm going to stand up out of my
chair and and that's going to feel
amazing is that going to work well no it
depends on the meaning that i attach to
something and this and this subjective
part can be a little tricky and a little
bit hard for people so i want to try and
lay it out in a in a concrete way so
that if they want to apply this they can
um incidentally or not so incidentally i
should say when you look at communities
of very high performers and i'm
fortunate enough to do some consulting
with some people from special forces
communities and so forth they're very
good as are you at attaching a reward to
specific behaviors in subjective ways so
growth mindset and these dopamine
rewards that we subjectively apply are
not about saying oh you know i had a
terrible day i performed poorly but you
know what it's great i just feel great
anyway it's not about that
it's not about attaching your sense of
reward to the ultimate goal
it's about attaching your sense of
reward to the fact that you're making
action steps that are generally in the
right direction the more you can reward
the effort process
the better off you are at building these
kinds of neural circuits and these kind
of tendencies to be able to lean into
anything challenging over essentially
any duration so how does this work like
how would somebody do this right well
keeping in mind that adrenaline and
epinephrine are all great for getting us
into action this is mother nature's way
of chemically making us feel kind of
agitated remember stress was designed to
agitate us to move us away from things
and toward things but realizing that
that's a
limited resource that eventually that
same chemical is what makes you
have a negative mindset it feels painful
it's the burn in your body it's
uncomfortable
and realizing that dopamine can push
back on that neurochemically it can
suppress those sensations of wanting to
quit you say well then how do i get this
dopamine to work for me before i hit a
goal because not every day is going to
be a real win there's some days i mean i
know from my science career there were
days that were really hard experiments
didn't work papers got rejected and yet
you know i've spent two decades or more
just drilling on and drilling on and
it's been a sheer pleasure at times but
there's been you know some pain points
along the way so what is this process
really about and how would somebody
implement these dopamine and epinephrine
type nor chemical events in their own
life well we all know the example of
like wanting to run a marathon i've
never run a marathon but um that'd be a
nice goal to have let's say tomorrow
morning i set my shoes near the door now
a lot of people have talked about this
day one you set your shoes near the door
day two you go out the door day three
you run around the block day four but
the key thing is not just to go through
the actions but when you hit each one of
those self-designated milestones the
milestones that you're setting out for
yourself you have to pause for a moment
and
tell yourself i'm heading in the right
direction i haven't run the marathon yet
but this is the foundation upon which
i'm going to lay another foundation upon
which i'm going to lay another
foundation and those little pulses of
dopamine allow you to get that action
step without the depletion that it would
normally bring otherwise you're just
like you're spending money this is like
replenishing this bank account that you
have and it's a neural bank account and
so dopamine is the is the thing that you
can control the dosing of and so if you
say
today it's my shoes at the door
but tomorrow it's around the block and
that's it but that's in the direction i
want to go what you do is you now get
those two events plus the next day the
mile long runners and so forth without
it depleting you it actually builds this
capacity to build more reward and this
is what you've done this is what people
from elite special forces can do they
know how to make small
simple
physical steps in the real world
that allow them to build on these reward
circuitries but they don't get
delusional about how they're doing they
they know they keep the end in mind but
they get very micro they move the
horizon in very close and so if you can
move the horizon to something you know
you can complete and you reward that
you essentially are where you were
before you're just as strong if not
stronger but you're heading in the
direction you need to go you're not
depleting you're not spending out
anything and it feels a little weird
because none of us like to reward things
that aren't external but the ability to
control these internal reward schedules
is everything for people to um
make use of every tool that they have at
their at their disposal something that
you've talked about that i've always
been really interested in at the
periphery but never
have um dove into it enough is hypnosis
when people think of hypnosis i think
they think of stage hypnosis what's the
real deal why is it useful and and how
do people actually use it yeah so um i'm
really glad you asked about this so i
have a colleague his name is david
spiegel in our department of psychiatry
at stanford and he and i have a
collaboration going now looking at how
respiration or breathing can be used to
shift the brain into different states
and
i've talked to david about this and so
i'm sort of borrowing from his words
here so i want to be fair that these are
from those conversations
so hypnosis inevitably involves relaxing
the nervous system taking the nervous
system into states that are more like
sleep now what i mean by that is in high
alert states where you're talking and
planning and inaction and stress in
particular
the brain is very linear it's saying
okay if this then this if then then this
is why we tend to be forward thinking
when we're when we're stressed we tend
to be not in our immediate experience
but really kind of forward thinking so
clinical hypnosis involves
going into a state of deeper relaxation
so that our analysis of space and time
meaning the way that the brain is
perceiving events is slightly
dismantled so that it's a little bit
dreamlike and then the hypnotist and
this could be by listening to a script
or listening to a hypnotherapist
starts to narrow our context take our
thoughts if you will it down a
particular path and that path could be
one of um stress reduction or
smoking cessation um hypnosis is
incidentally is very good for treatment
of smoking cessation or
for feelings of well-being or
confronting traumas so what it is is
it's really opening up the window for
neural plasticity which is of course the
brain's ability to change in response to
experience to trigger neuroplasticity
you have to have
focus especially as an adult you need
acetylcholine released but
high levels of attention acetylcholine
and norepinephrine together
norepinephrine to create that sense of
urgency and acetylcholine to bring that
spotlight of focus in really really
tight that triggers plasticity but the
actual it marks certain synapses in the
brain for change but the actual changes
in the synapses the rewiring okay that
happens during states of sleep and deep
rest
so this is why when you're trying to
learn a motor skill you go and you go in
your tennis serve it's not happening
it's not happening you take a break you
come back and you nail it you're like
wait what happened well you needed time
to set those circuits in motion and
allow them to do to the rewiring the
sort of adaptation hypnosis seems to
capture both the high attentional state
and the deep relaxation at the same time
it's this very unusual state of mind
where you're neither asleep nor awake
and in tight focus or narrow focus
and it's very clear that it leads to
these rapid changes in behavior because
you're rewiring the brain and the reason
you're able to rewire the brain so
quickly is because you're getting the
trigger event the focus
and you're also getting the relaxation
event simultaneously and so it's much
faster than separating out the learning
trigger from the actual rewiring of the
brain
my lab has a deep interest and david
spiegel's lab has a deep interest now in
using respiration or breathing to shift
our state to either heightened states of
focus and alertness to open up
neuroplasticity right there are going to
be lots of ways to access can you give
me some examples like what are we doing
very specifically breath work i find
incredibly interesting i changed my life
through meditation just shifting my
breathing to diaphragmatic breathing was
no joke it changed my life it changed my
relationship to anxiety my feeling of
being able to control my state as it
started to spiral um
so i'd be very curious to know what type
of breathing are we talking about here
yeah so i'm really glad you mentioned
the diaphragm diaphragm of course being
this muscle inside of all of us at least
all mammals that works all the time to
move our lungs because all the cells in
our body need oxygen of course we've got
to get rid of carbon dioxide it does
that but it's done reflexively but we
can also take voluntary control over it
i want to just mention about the
diaphragm why it's so important for what
were these state changes is that a lot
of people talk about the vagus nerve and
all this stuff the vagus and these
connections between the brain and this
vagus nerve or the gut
it's what gets activated when you're
really full and you eat a big meal and
you feel relaxed those are great but
it's very slow
the diaphragm is skeletal muscle just
like your bicep just like your tricep
just like your quadricep it is the only
internal organ except maybe a couple
muscles in your throat that are actually
skeletal muscle meaning it was designed
to be voluntarily moved
and the diaphragm isn't just designed to
move your lungs it also sends a signal
through the so-called phrenic nerve back
to the brain to inform your brain about
the status of your body so when you
breathe fast deliberately the reason you
feel kind of an elevated sense of
alertness is because
yeah there are chemicals secreted but
mostly because the phrenic nerve is
firing off it's telling you hey the
body's moving we're really running now
even though you're stationary in a chair
if you're doing breathing or if you're
breathing very slowly and rhythmically
right box type breathing or you know
slow slow breathing
your diaphragm is telling your brain hey
we're calm we're good and you calm down
very quickly on the order of seconds and
so once you start tapping into this you
start realizing okay movement of the
body was designed to inform the brain of
where to be not just the brain telling
the body and how does the body
communicate with the brain through the
phrenic nerve from the diaphragm so my
lab is really pursuing two questions and
this is still being worked out so i just
want to highlight that it's still in
progress
but
certain patterns of breathing will calm
you very much like entering a hypnotic
state and so you have a subset of
neurons in your brain stem that are
responsible for sighing is it you have a
subset of neurons in your brainstem
responsible for for coughing subset of
neurons responsible for laughter and a
subset of neurons in your brainstem for
sign this was a paper published in
nature this is a real thing these
neurons are every so often and your dog
does this too you inhale twice
and then you exhale long
now that double inhale
best done through the nose on the
inhales and then long exhale through the
mouth
activates the psi neurons that trigger
the so-called calming reflex the
parasympathetic arm of the nervous
system so we have a hard-wired mechanism
a set of neurons connection in the
diaphragm and back again from the
diaphragm to the brain that was designed
to activate calm
and when people ask me how should i
breathe to calm myself down i always say
double inhale through the nose followed
by exhales two or three of those will
reset your autonomic nervous system
faster than any other mechanism we're
aware of
because it's really capitalizing on a
set of neural circuits now once you're
calm you say well how do i get into
plasticity states there you want to go
the other direction
that's going to be inhaling a lot more
than you exhale you're going to be
driving in more oxygen than you are
breathing out
generally carbon dioxide and that will
lead to states that are kind of more
elevated this is typical of things like
tumor breathing wim hof breathing
kundalini breathing and when people
enter those states
their whole world changes because it
shuts off the frontal cortex it really
this is why sometimes people pass out or
they feel like they want to get up and
move you know you get some odd behavior
when you're doing this kind of thing
so the key is if you want to access
states of heightened plasticity let's
say you want to learn faster where you
want to be more
you want to bring more out of some
physical training that you're doing the
key is to apply those principles first
you need to focus you need to bring
yourself to that heightened state of
alertness you can breathe to do that so
this would be super oxygenated breathing
then you want to drop into a state of
calm and you do that by these a couple
maybe two or three rounds of inhale
inhale exhale inhale inhale exhale and
then now your brain is in a state we
believe this is still again being worked
out in our in labs like mine and david's
that then you're in a state for
heightened learning
because you're in a state where
neurochemicals like acetylcholine are
going to be at levels that are higher
than they typically would be things like
noradrenaline slightly higher than they
typically would be but not in a
discombobulated way in a very regulated
way and the cool thing is you're
regulating them so you could argue you
know earlier we were talking about
subjective emotions and thoughts and all
these things but one thing that's
absolutely concrete is breathing i
always think of physical exercise
movement writing
whatever singing dancing talking those
are physical actions in the universe
then you have thoughts and somewhere in
between those is controlling your
respiration once you can control
everything that's within the confines of
your skull and skin once you can really
control that relationship that brain
body relationship you start to realize
that relationship is a lot like any
other relationship to forward action
it's just all happening within the
confines of my body so it's heightened
states of focus followed by states of
relaxation that are going to prime your
nervous system for learning and
plasticity just like hypnosis
human beings have evolved tons of
technologies uh and currencies bitcoin
ethereum
are not topics i know a lot a lot about
but when you think about dollar euro
bitcoin ethereum you think about wins
and losses
in sport in life in relationship in
anything something in your brain and
body has to keep track of that did you
win did you lose what's a letdown what's
a celebration and
i think one of the most important
findings in the last few years in
neuroscience is that
while the molecule dopamine is
associated with reward
it's more about
motivation and craving
there's a really classic experiment now
that people use to demonstrate this take
two rats
and the rats independently separate
cages can lever press
for food
or when they can access food
there's a little bit of dopamine that's
released anytime they get some food so
we always thought that food like many
other rewards
like food sex warmth when you're cold
cool when you're too warm
is triggering the release of dopamine
but
someone had the good idea to deplete
dopamine in one of those animals
and then what you find is that the
animal without
dopamine still enjoys food
still enjoys other pleasures so dopamine
is not really involved in the enjoyment
of those pleasures it's involved in
motivation because if you make the
animal have to move just one rat's
length
believe it or not to get to that lever
the animal with dopamine will work to go
get that thing it will work through some
effort to go get the reward whereas the
animal
or it turns out the human without much
dopamine
can still experience pleasure they can
sit on their couch and cram their face
with pleasure-inducing calories or what
have you watch pleasure-inducing things
on the television but they have very
little motivation to go pursue things
that will deliver them pleasure so when
i say dopamine is the universal currency
of
everything what i mean is it's driving
the motivation to develop new currencies
when somebody can sit back and say uh
i'll just throw this number out let's
say somebody has a hundred thousand
bitcoins which presumably now is worth
oh my god
certainly more than it was a few years
ago
the way they can register whether or not
they are in a position of wealth or not
has everything to do with the the number
they see on the screen or in their
bitcoin wallet
but that number is converted into a
chemical signal that has everything to
do with
how much you had previously so so we
could talk about the so-called reward
prediction error how good you feel with
an experience has everything to do with
how much you had previously
and dopamine itself is what's driving
the human species to create these new
technologies and so
while we think of currencies as the goal
it's actually what's really driven the
forward evolution of our our species has
been the desire to go seek things beyond
the confines of our skin and when i say
the common currency is dopamine what i
mean is the molecule dopamine when
secreted in the brain makes us pursue
things build things create things makes
us want new things that we don't
currently already have and so it has a
lot of dimensions to it but rather than
think about dopamine as a signal for
reward like a dopamine hit we
classically think to talk about it it's
more accurate really to think about
dopamine as driving motivation and
craving to go seek rewards that's the
rad experiment and it's a way of
tabulating where we are in our life are
we doing well or are we doing poorly and
that happens on very short time scales
like you wake up feeling good
or do you wake up feeling kind of low
or
on long time scales if you're halfway
through a long degree or you're halfway
through your life how are you doing how
do you gauge that well it has everything
to do with how much dopamine you were
releasing in the previous days and weeks
and years so you're always comparing and
all of this is subconscious but what's
cool is that once you make these
processes conscious once you understand
a little bit about how dopamine is
released and how it changes our
perspective and our behavior then you
can actually work with it so it's one of
the
instances where knowledge of knowledge
actually turns out to be a really useful
tool
dude that's crazy to me so one of the
things that i get hit up about all the
time is
people feel stuck
and as you like really push on them to
figure out why they feel stuck they'll
be like yeah i want to do that and but i
just you know i can't get out of bed or
i don't have the energy to pursue it or
whatever and
you get into this
common thing that people say in mindset
and i really believe it but i find it
far more interesting when you're talking
about it from a neuro chemical
standpoint which is you just don't want
it badly enough
and when i think about
my own life i sometimes worry
that i'm either more malleable than
other people or that i have a greater
ability to manipulate my dopamine
release or whatever
because i'm very good at building desire
and i like the way that desire feels now
when you use the word hunger i think
people get confused because i actually
don't enjoy being hungry for food i find
that totally unpleasurable
however being hungry for sex i find
incredibly i feel alive i feel focused i
feel energized i feel aggressive it's
complex for sure but i find that feeling
incred the the act of wanting something
in the future in in that kind or in
business and trying to build something
i've in fact that's an interesting
insight into my own self about i like to
build
and
do we know so we dopamine is the
neurochemistry of the pursuit of making
sure that i have the energy to go but do
we know how we can spike that
well first of all it's clear to me based
on your description that you've tapped
into these
uh channels that release dopamine
because craving and wanting whether or
not it's sex or or
money or connection
or anything all right
is
that's the primary trigger for dopamine
release
yep now sex and reproduction makes the
most sense from the perspective of
evolution uh
i mean any species every species
has tends to have two
primary goals one protect its young and
second make more of itself usually in
reverse order right
so even for people that don't want
children i mean you might not or people
of course not everyone is having sex
just to reproduce but at a
primordial level that's what those
circuits are there for so every species
in particular mammalian species where
there's a lot of parenting and
caretaking
of the young
tries to take make more of itself and
everything that you see like maternal
aggression which is a powerful circuit
that gets activated after uh females of
any species in particular mammals give
birth they will fight to the death and
they gain superhuman strength in order
to protect their young that's a there's
a known circuit for that in the brain
that gets activated once a female has
offspring
and it's robust right so interesting man
like have you read the book the female
brain i have not oh my god so i just
probably lost a lot of points but no no
but you're one it'll be super
interesting because you'll know if she's
on the right track from a neuroscience
perspective i remember reading the book
at the time i thought i was going to
have kids
and i remember thinking whoa like this
book chronicles what happens to a
woman's brain and how things change and
i was like when you have kids man you
are inviting a
neurochemical change in your significant
other that is going to play itself out
in a very real way and i'd be lying if i
said that wasn't one of the things one
of the many things but one of the things
that i factored into not having kids
interesting uh and then the same with
menopause that it's this really dramatic
sort of reorganizing might not be the
right word but that it it has real
implications in the
way that the person moves just as the
decline of testosterone has in men well
in on a um
on the positive side
during pregnancy the woman's hippocampus
her brain area associated with memory
and retention of information it goes
through a period in which it gets
worse for certain types of information
but then achieves superior levels of
working memory once
the babies arrive because there are a
lot of things to manage so this makes
sense this is true in rodents this is
true in humans and then in terms of the
biology of the father we now know that
when because typically parents have uh
you know does seem like one spouse
always does more than the other um but
even in the most evenly divided
households
the there's usually some co-parenting of
some sort but that the father has a
big increase in the hormone prolactin
when
the mother is expecting and the
prolactin lays down body fat it prepares
for sleepless nights for women it it
sparks the circuitry for milk letdown
for for nursing
um so the dad bod has a lot to do with
prolactin this is true in in birds in
small mammals and in humans and this has
now been there was a paper published in
nature
on humans specifically about this and
when you think about the relationship
between dopamine and prolactin it's it's
interesting and it takes us back to this
motivation and craving that you were
describing earlier which is that
dopamine and prolactin work in in
opposite fashion so the the most salient
example of this is sex and reproduction
where anticipation of sex and
reproduction greatly increases dopamine
but posts
reproductive post-sex it doesn't have to
be for reproduction there's a spark in
prolactin in the mail
the
spike excuse me in prolactin and that
spike in prolactin is actually what sets
the refractory period during which he
can't mate again so it sets a period of
quiescence to keep men it's for pair
bonding for the exchange of chemicals
through the nose through this through
the skin and through the sweat
mainly through odor uh we could talk
about pheromones if you want but that's
a topic that's somewhat controversial
the actual identity of pheromones in
humans has not been identified but there
are pheromone effects in humans
controversial in that people don't agree
what's really happening well okay so
there's this culture of biologists that
have clearly identified
pheromone effects in other in non-humans
and non-human primates
but whether or not those are
the classic definition of a pheromone
effect is that it's subconscious that
you can't actually detect the smell
however we know that smells themselves
conscious detection of them can evoke
very robust physiological responses one
one example to just stay in this arena
of of of thought is that a guy by the
name of gnome sobel who's at the
weizmann institute he used to be at
berkeley he has a lab over in israel his
amazing lab works on olfaction
smell
and they discovered that the scent of
women's tears causes a dramatic and
significant reduction in testosterone in
men what absolutely and this was
published if anyone wants to go look it
up it was published in science magazine
you know you can smell tears yeah we
have you know the super bowl of
publishing and science is science nature
and self those are the three top
journals this is published in science
magazine very stringent uh the smell of
tears now it's subconscious at some
level
but the other thing that if we were
going to kind of play around in this
hormones and behave interactions between
humans um there are some really
interesting examples so for instance
men will rate the smell of a woman's
skin or sweat or the perception of her
face as more beautiful during the
pre-ovulatory phase of her menstrual
cycle
that pre-ovulatory phase is associated
with a number of different changes in
hormones okay
just that smell will increase
testosterone in a male
and oral contraception in the female
women taking overall contraception it
adjusts their hormones such that men no
longer detect this change in
how attractive women are doesn't mean
they find them unattractive but it means
they don't find them increasingly
interactive during this certain period
of the of their
of their menstrual cycle so we are
constantly signaling back and forth
through hormones in fact we met over
there
and shook hands because we've been
tested for covet and the rest we shook
hands and
what happened and what happens within 30
seconds of any human being contacting
one another is they shake hands and then
they wipe their the chemicals of the
other person on their face
gnome's lab has also shown this and so
we are constantly signaling through
through chemical exchange sometimes it's
subconscious and those are the so-called
pheromone effects sometimes it's low
levels of odors that are beneath our
conscious detection and sometimes it's
outright wow this person smells really
really good or they look particularly
good today oftentimes that's tied to the
of their period in which they are
ovulating in their menstrual cycle so i
want to plant a flag here about all the
things that we do
that are
messing with these mechanisms like
cologne or deodorant or oral
contraception of which i'm not saying is
pornography yeah like all interception
has served a great role in it for
certain people some people might say it
was this is an ethical discussion or is
it good is it bad but um either way it
is having an effect right so to remove i
only look at things through the lens of
biology not through the lens of of
whether or not we should or shouldn't do
things i love it
doing the work changes our story about
the work
and i think it's so much more reliable
and so much easier
to love what you do than it is to do
what you love